# How to structure your code

With our insights from [coding a figure](code.md) and from the [guide
lines](docs/guide.md) we arrive on some best-practice tips on how to
structure your code for figures, such that:

- Others, including your future self, are able to modify your figures.
- Plot appearance can be changed quickly from a central module.
- Design and content are separated.
- It makes fun to improve your plots.


## File organization

From our general [guidelines](guide.md) we already get some hints on
how to organize the scripts generating the figures. Let's repeat the
relevant issues:

1. Each figure is generated by a single python script.
2. The basename of the generated figure is the same as the one of the python script generating it.
3. The python script only generates the figure, it does not do any heavy computations.
4. Have a single central python module that defines basic figure appearance.

Let's assume we need three figures that we call `basicdata`,
`methods`, and `coolresult`.  Then for each of the figures we will
have a separate python script (1.)  with the respective name (2.).
That way everybody easily finds the script generating that figure.

In addition, we will have a script defining the appearance of the
figures (4.) that will be imported by all of the scripts generating
the actual figures. Let's call that script `plotstyle.py`. This helps
us to separate content from layout.

We keep the file hierarchy flat and simply have four files in our
working directory:
```  txt
+-- plotstyle.py
+-- basicdata.py
+-- methods.py
+-- coolresult.py
```

The `plotstyle.py` module provides a function that we name here
`plot_style()`. This function contains code defining the overall
design of your plots. So mainly some
[rcParams](https://matplotlib.org/stable/tutorials/introductory/customizing.html)
settings. We discuss the details below, for now we only set the ticks
to point outwards:
```py
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

def plot_style():
    plt.rcParam['xtick.direction'] = 'out'
    plt.rcParam['ytick.direction'] = 'out'
```


## Plotting scripts

So how to write a script generating a figure?

Let's start simple with the script `basicdata.py` generating a figure
with just a single panel (subplot).


### Package imports

First of all we need the usual imports of `numpy`, `scipy`, and `pandas` as
required, of `matplotlib.pyplot` and the `plot_style()` function
from our central `plotstyle.py` module:
```py
import numpy as np
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
from plotstyle import plot_style
```

In contrast to your analysis scripts, try to keep the number of
imported packages as low as possible. This reduces dependencies to a
minimum and makes it easier to reuse the code for generating the
figures. A low number of imports should be no problem, because the
plotting scripts are only plotting and are not supposed to do any
complex data analysis.  The results of complex computation are stored
in files. The plotting scripts just need to read these files and plot
their content - not much overhead is needed.

In particular this implies that we do not need to import `numba` for
plotting!

An well readable import list is necessary so that one can easily trace
back the origin of some functions. To support this

- import only what is needed by your script
- import every package/symbol only once
- sort the imports according to package - common packages first, your
  own modules last.


### Main code

We start out at the bottom of the script with the
following two lines:
```py
if __name__ == "__main__":
    plot_style()
```
The call of the `plot_style()` function sets up the plot
appearance as dicussed below.

The following lines of code should set up the figure, call functions
generating the actual plots, and save the figure to a file. In case of
our simple example this looks like this:
```py
    fig, ax = plt.subplots(figsize=(6, 4))
    fig.subplots_adjust(top=0.95, bottom=0.1, left=0.1, right=0.95)
    plot_data(ax)
    fig.savefig('basicdata.pdf')
```

The call to `plt.subplots()` returns a new figure of the specified
size and a single axes. We exclusively use the object-oriented
interface of matplotlib. That way it is always clear on which axes
plot commands are applied. And matplotlib recommends using the
object-oriented interface anyways (check out the [API
overview](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/index.html) and [the
lifecycle of a
plot](https://matplotlib.org/stable/tutorials/introductory/lifecycle.html)).
See the [plottools.figure](figure.md#figure-size) module for the `cmsize`
argument, that allows to specifiy the figure size in centimeters
instead of inches.

Most certainly you need to adjust the figure margins via
[`fig.subplots_adjust()`](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/figure_api.html#matplotlib.figure.Figure.subplots_adjust). A
good plot does not have excessive white space. In particular if you
include your figure in a LaTeX document it is much simpler to handle
when it tightly fills the figure canvas. `fig.tight_layout()` usually
does not work, but you may give a try to the `constrained_layout`
argument to `plt.subplots()`. A problem with
[`fig.subplots_adjust()`](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/figure_api.html#matplotlib.figure.Figure.subplots_adjust)
is, that the figure margins are specified relative to the figure
size. Whenever changing the figure size you need to readjust the
figure margins, which is pretty annoying. Alternatively you may use
the `topm`, `bottomm`, `leftm`, `rightm` arguments introduced by the
[plottools.subplots](subplots.md#figure-margins) module, that allow to
specify the margins in units of the font size and are thus independent
of the figure size.

The following function call to `plot_data(ax)` does the actual
plotting. We discuss this in the next section.

Finally, the figure needs to be saved. The filename should be the same
as the name of the script to allow others to find the script given the
figure file. You may omit the file extension if you have set the
[rcParam](https://matplotlib.org/stable/tutorials/introductory/customizing.html)
`savefig.format` to your preferred format. In the context of
scientific publications this should be a vector graphic format like
`pdf` or `svg`. Using the
[plottools.figure](figure.md#default-file-name) module allows you to
call `fig.savefig()` without argument. It then automatically saves the
figure under the same name as the script.

Of course, you may stuff all this figure code into a function.


### Plot code

The basic unit of any figure is a plot, a single matplotlib axes.  You
may rearrange the position of an axes within a figure or even move an
axes to another figure. To allow for this flexibility summarizing all
code needed to draw the content of an axes into a single dedicated
function is central. This function takes as the first argument the
axes into which it should draw.

*For every axes make a function that does the plotting and that takes
 this axes as an argument.*

In our example this is the `plot_data()` function that might look
like this:
```py
def plot_data(ax):
    x, y = load_data()
    ax.plot(x, y)
    ax.set_xlabel('x')
    ax.set_ylabel('y')
```
The first part of the function loads or generates the data to be
plotted - symbolized by the `load_data()` function call.  The second
part does the actual plotting. If you manage to separate content from
design (more on this below), then these functions for the actual
plotting are usually simple and sweet. Everybody can comprehend what
is going on. The function - the plot - can be easily reused in a
different context.

Alternatively we could have called `load_data()` outside the
`plot_data()` function and pass the loaded data as arguments to the
plot function:
```py
    x, y = load_data()
    plot_data(ax, x, y)
```
Then `plot_data()` would only contain plot commands. This is in
particular useful for a multi-panel plot, where many panels use the
same data for their plotting.  On the other hand, in many cases the
data are loaded or generated in no time. So from a performance point
of view it does not hurt to load/generate them for any plot within
each plot function. But with the load function inside you need less
function arguments and the plot function can be more easily moved
somewhere else.


### Complexity/simplicity of the plot function

Let us assume for now that we do not need to care about how the plot
generated by a plotting function looks like. That is, we managed to
separate content from design. The design is achieved entirely through
some magic happening in the `plot_style()` function and the plot
function anly needs to provide content.

Then a plotting function usually gets quite simple. What is left to
specify simply is:

- what to plot, e.g. `ax.plot(x, y)`. Of course, this might require
  several commands, but if you provide the data such that they can
  directly stuff it into the plot commands, this stays simple.
- how to annotate, e.g. `ax.text()` and/or some arrows.
- axis limits, e.g. `ax.set_xlim()`.
- tick marks (actually that often is a matter of design and should not be here...).
- axis scaling, e.g. `ax.set_xscale('log')`.
- axis labels, e.g. `ax.set_xlabel()`.

That's it. No hiding of spines, no fixing of tick positions, etc. All
these design issues should at least be bundled in some helper
functions that would go into the central `plotstyle.py` module. Having
code for the design directly in the plot function makes it very
tedious to change the design later on, because this then needs to be
changed in every plot function. Anyways, repeating the same commands
over and over in all the different plot functions is not a good coding
style!

How to provide the data for the plotting function is the only other
issue. You should make sure by means of other scripts that the data
are available in appropriate formats. The data should be stored in a
way that makes it simple to plot them. Then it is simply a matter of
loading a file and selecting, for example, the relevant rows and
columns. No rearranging, fixing, or whatever annoying stuff should be
needed to make the data plotable. All this should go into scripts that
output the files on which the plotting is based.

The big advantages of keeping the plotting- as well as the
data-handling code simple are

- less arguments need to be passed to the plot function, which makes
  the code less cluttered, and
- dependencies of the plot function are reduced, which makes it
  simpler to copy (or import) the plot function to another script and
  use it there.


### Multipanel figures

Scripts for multipanel figures follow the same structure as the
single-panel script discussed so far. We have the same minimal
imports. The main code setting up the figure is more complex, of
course. For example, the main code in a `coolresult.py` script might
look like this:
```py
if __name__ == "__main__":
    plot_style()
    fig, axs = plt.subplots(2, 2, figsize=(6, 4))
    fig.subplots_adjust(top=0.95, bottom=0.1, left=0.1, right=0.95, hspace=0.6, wspace=0.6)
    plot_waveform(axs[0,0])
    plot_temperature(axs[0,1])
    plot_signal_n_power(axs[1,0], axs[1,1])
    fig.savefig('coolresult.pdf')
```
With the `plt.subplots()` we generate an array of axes.

We pass `hspace` and `wspace` arguments to
[`fig.subplots_adjust()`](https://matplotlib.org/stable/api/figure_api.html#matplotlib.figure.Figure.subplots_adjust). Try
large values! You will be surprised how much better your plot looks
with lot's of white space between the panels, althought the panels get
smaller.


## Plot style

You may pass a few arguments to `plot_style()`, but try to keep this
simple. In the end, all the generated plots should follow the same
design, so there should be no need to pass arguments to
`plot_style()`.

